---
layout: post
title: How to set up a company
categories:
- tax
---

Some clients want to form a company to do business and ask me what forms of
business they should consider, and the tax consequences. This post addresses this issue.

The following are among the reasons why people might form a company.

- Organization: First and foremost, forming a company can provide a legal and
organizational framework that can help to streamline and manage the
business's activities more effectively. A company can have a formal organizational structure with different
levels of management and decision-making authority. This can help
to clarify roles and responsibilities within the business and make
it easier to coordinate activities.

- Professional image: A company
is often seen as more credible than a sole proprietorship or
partnership, which can be helpful for attracting customers and
partners. A company may also be seen as more stable and long-lasting
than a sole proprietorship or partnership, which can be an advantage
for building relationships with customers, suppliers, and other
stakeholders.

- Limited liability: A company is a separate legal entity from its
owners, so the owners are generally not personally liable for the
company's debts or legal problems if you do not comingle funds between
business and personal, and exercise other precausions. However the limited liability
offered by LLC does not replace good business practice, and adequate insurance coverage.

- Succession: A company can continue to operate even
if the founders leave, making it easier to transfer
ownership and control.

With these purposes in mind, a formal review of the most common types of business structures
in the United States is in order.

- Sole proprietorship: This is the simplest and most common type
of business structure. As a sole proprietor, you own and operate
your business by yourself, and you are personally responsible for
all of the debts and obligations of the business.

- Partnership: A partnership is a business structure in which two
or more individuals own and operate the business together. There
are two main types of partnerships: general partnerships and limited
partnerships. In a general partnership, all partners are personally
responsible for the debts and obligations of the business. In a
limited partnership, there are both general partners and limited
partners. The general partners are personally responsible for the
debts and obligations of the business, while the limited partners
have limited liability.

- Corporation: A corporation is a legal entity that is separate
from its owners. This means that the corporation itself, rather
than the owners, is responsible for the debts and obligations of
the business. There are two main types of corporations: C corporations
and S corporations. C corporations are taxed at the corporate level,
while S corporations are pass-through entities, which means that
the income of the corporation is passed through to the individual
owners and taxed at the individual level.

- Limited liability company (LLC): An LLC is a hybrid business
structure that combines features of both a corporation and a
partnership. Like a corporation, an LLC offers its owners limited
liability protection, which means that they are not personally
responsible for the debts and obligations of the business. However,
like a partnership, an LLC is a pass-through entity, which means
that the income of the business is passed through to the individual
owners and taxed at the individual level.

Among the four most common business forms LLC is most flexibl in that
it meets all four purposes of establishing a business:
organization, professional image, liability, and succession, and
it has an option how it files its taxes: as a sole proprietorship, a partnership, an S Corp,
or a C Corp when certain conditions satisfied, as depicted in the following ASCII art.

```
You --> Sole Proprietorship --------> Schedule C --------> Form 1040 (Personal Tax)
   |      (Self Employed)                 ^                  |        |         ^
   |                                 Net Income <-- FICA --> K1       ^         |
   |                                      |                  ^        |         ^
   \-------> LLC --> Sole Proprietorship -/                  |     W2 + K1      |
              |      (Default for Single Member LLC)         ^        | ^ no    ^
              |                                              |        ^ FICA    |
              |  --> Partnership Form 1065 ------------------/        |         ^
              |      (Default for Multi Member LLC)                   ^         |
              |                                                       |         ^
              \  --> S Corp --> Form 1120S (Pass Thru) ---------------/         |
              |      (Domestic share holders <= 100)                         W2 + 1099-DIV
              |                                                                 |   ^ no
              \  --> C Corp --> Form 1120 (Business Tax) -----------------------/   FICA
                     (Double Tax)
```

Please note an entity creation to do business and entity election to file taxes are
of two different dimensions. You register your company with the state, and you choose
how to files taxes with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). When eligible, an LLC can
choose different ways to file taxes with the IRS, and no matter how you choose, it is
the same entity that you registered with the state.

Let us discuss different ways an LLC can file taxes.

First of all, you do not need to form a business in order to do business, you can always
operate as a sole proprietor (self employed), and report your business income and expenses
on [Schedule C][schedule_c] (Profit or Loss From Business) which will flow to
the main form 1040 where personal tax will be computed.

If you have set up an LLC, it defauts to sole proprietorship for filing taxes when it is a
single-member LLC, and to partnership for filing taxes when it is a multi-member LLC.

These two simpler forms of filing taxes does not distinguish between
earned income and business profit. Earned income is subject to FICA tax, also known as self employment tax,
which is essentially the social security and medicare taxes, while business profit is not,
so you pay FICA taxes on the entire net income, i.e. gross receipt less expenses when filing
as sole proprietorship and partnership. 

There are special cases where FICA tax can be escaped, for example, nonresidents
being retreated a sole proprietor receiving [Form 1099-NEC][1099_nec], but in general [Schedule C][schedule_c]
is not the place to separate wages and business profit.

A partnership consisting of husband and wife can choose to file two [Schedule C's][schedule_c] in a
[community state](comm_state), eliminating the burden to file a separate partnership return.

An LLC can elect to file as a C Corp or an S Corp when qualified to accomodate more complex income and expense
data structure. The S Corp has the advantage that it passes through its income to the individule to be
taxed only, however you have the meet the following conditions to be an S Corp:

xxx

A Corp incurs double taxation: when income is generated at the Corp level, and when it is
distributed to the shareholders as dividends. 

When an expense is deductible, it can be deducted whether you open a business or not, and how
you choose to file taxes. When a business has a large portion of profit, filing as an S Corp
can have a limited advantage. For example, when you are in software consulting business, and you
get paid hourly, then 100% of the income is earned income without profit. On the other hand,
when you write an app for sale, after paying yourself "reasonable" wages, the surplus is the
profit. As aforementioned, the business profit is not subject to FICA taxes, so you could "save" taxes
this way.

The "saving" is limited because:

- (a) While you avoid FICA taxes, you also miss the 20% income, Qualified Business Income
Deduction [QBID](qbid).

- (b) The larger part of the FICA taxes, the social security tax has an upper limit person. If you have wages
from other job, you might have reached the maximum.

Whether it can save and how much you can save by filing as an S Corp is an applied math problem. 

i*92.35%*80%*24% + i*15.3% = i*(1-r)*92.35%*80%*24% + i*r*24% + i*(1-r)*80%*15.3%
31.44% = (1-r)*31.44% + 24%*r

[schedule_c]: https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/f1040sc.pdf
[1099_nec]: https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/f1099nec.pdf
[comm_state]: xxx
[qbid]: xxx

xxx: FICA rates
xxx: FICA maximum
