---
layout: post
title: Navigating RSU Payments Across States or Countries
categories:
- tax
---

Restricted Stock Units (RSUs) stand apart from wages as they reflect your
contribution over an extended timeframe, spanning from the offer date to the
vesting date. This distinction becomes particularly noteworthy when you've
transitioned between states or even countries during this period, necessitating
a proportional allocation of income to the respective tax authorities.

Take, for instance, a scenario that commenced on January 1, 2022. You were
awarded RSUs while residing in Massachusetts (MA), but by the year's end, you
relocated to a California (CA) office. Fast forward to July 1, 2023, you vest
in part of the promised shares, valued at $30,000. This payment not only
represents your efforts over the past year and a half but also necessitates
income allocation between MA and CA due to your residence change, $20,000
attributed to MA for the year spent there and the remaining $10,000 as income
in CA.

However, the complexity arises upon receiving the RSUs as a California
resident, where the entire $30,000 is recognized as California income.
Nevertheless, you are eligible for a credit for the $20,000 taxed by MA.

This example merely scratches the surface. The reality involves diverse RSU
streams with varying offer and vest dates, requiring meticulous paycheck
reviews to identify doubly taxed income and secure credits accordingly. This
principle also applies to international relocations, such as Google employees
moving to Canada or the United Kingdom after not securing an H1-B visa.

To navigate this complex process, I developed a spreadsheet that precisely
allocates RSU income across jurisdictions. In one case, I calculated the U.S.
and Canada allocation for multiple RSU streams for a Google employee who
relocated to Canada, confirming her W-2 accurately reflected the U.S. portion
subject to both U.S. income tax and California state tax as a nonresident.

Company practices in handling these allocations vary, especially if residency
changes are not communicated. During the COVID-19 pandemic, numerous
individuals found their residency unintentionally altered, often extending
stays abroad beyond initial plans. I've assisted in reallocating U.S. and
foreign income for RSU holders in such predicaments. As the income
earned outside the U.S. is exempt from U.S. income tax, it provides the only silver lining
amidst the pandemic's dark clouds.
